[SYCL][Doc] Release Notes for Nov'24 release (#17179)
intel/llvm: sycl/ReleaseNotes.md

- Deprecated `[[intel::reqd_sub_group_size]]`, the official SYCL 2020 spelling should be used instead (with `sycl::` namespace). intel/llvm#15798
- Disabled ITT annotations in device code by default to reduce device code size. intel/llvm#14910
- Enabled floating point atomics via `atomicrmw` instructions for Native CPU. intel/llvm#15888
- Enabled nonsemantic debug info by default. This should slightly improve debugging experience. intel/llvm#16120

### SYCL Library

- Enabled check for use of `SYCL_PI_TRACE` on all Linux to inform users that `SYCL_UR_TRACE` should be used instead. intel/llvm#15113
- Improved GDB printers for SYCL types/values. intel/llvm#15076
- Renamed `ur` to `ur.call` in XPTI traces. intel/llvm#14971
- Refactored XPTI framework to use 128-bit keys for collision elimination and added support for 64-bit universal IDs for backward compatibility. Previous 64-bit hash values were used to represent trace points and this has led to a few of hash  collisions. intel/llvm#14467
- Made calling `command_graph::begin_recording` repeatedly an error. intel/llvm#15192

> - Reduced number of devicelib files that have to be redistributed for CUDA and HIP backends. As a side effect, device libraries cannot be selectively used anymore either all of them are linked, or none. intel/llvm#15048 intel/llvm#15055

Reviewer: More importantly the second PR intel/llvm#15055 added devicelib support for AMD, which enable uses of `std::` math built-in. We could add a line like this:

> - Added some C++ standard library math function support on AMD. intel/llvm#15055

Author: Ok, thanks, fixed per suggestion.

- Native CPU now uses a pass to convert ABI-compliant calls to mux builtins, removing vector versions and ensuring the interface remains unaffected by the ABI. intel/llvm#15592
- The `-fsycl-link=image` behavior is updated to package host objects similarly to `-fsycl-link=early`, ensuring proper linking, especially on Windows. intel/llvm#15539
- Enabled generation of approximate `div`/`sqrt` with `-ffast-math` for NVTPX. intel/llvm#15553
- Added extra optimization passes in Native CPU pipeline. intel/llvm#14380
- Updated implementation of `-fsycl-host-compiler` option to only use user-provided hints (i.e. `PATH`) to locate the specified compiler. Previously this option also took into account a few extra locations implicitly known to the toolchain, potentially causing incorrect binary to be used. intel/llvm#15769
- Deprecated `[[intel::reqd_sub_group_size]]`, the official SYCL 2020 spelling should be used instead (with `sycl::` namespace). intel/llvm#15798
- Disabled ITT annotations in device code by default to reduce device code size. intel/llvm#14910
- Enabled floating point atomics via `atomicrmw` instructions for Native CPU. intel/llvm#15888

> - Enabled nonsemantic debug info by default (except fpga target). This should slightly improve debugging experience. intel/llvm#16120

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Enabled nonsemantic debug info by default (except fpga target) improving debugging experience for device code. intel/llvm#16120
```
Q: is FPGA still a part of this release?

Author: No, thanks, removed `(except fpga target)`

- Fixed race conditions in the group algorithms implemented in libclc for AMDGPU because the control barriers were not emitting any fences due to unspecified semantics. intel/llvm#12873
- Fixed device assertion bug on Windows where the assertion message is not printed when an assertion is triggered. intel/llvm#15232
- Made `event::get_backend()`, `size()` method of the image classes, `device_image::has_kernel()` to be exception-free as they are `noexcept` according to specification. intel/llvm#15173
- Fixed linker errors for `WorkGroup` collective functions on Native CPU backend. intel/llvm#15144
- Fixed a hang when invalid values are provided to `ONEAPI_DEVICE_SELECTOR`. intel/llvm#15255
- Addressed several issues in GDB xmethods: printing non-sycl types may generate a python exception, accessor subscripts using `size_t` report an unsupported subscript type, multi-dimensional accessors calculate the wrong array layout. intel/llvm#15250
- Fixed a flaky failure when getting write access to a buffer from multiple threads. intel/llvm#15273
- Fixed `nullptr` input handling for `make_kernel_bundle` interoperability API. intel/llvm#15247

> - Enabled usage of Windows proxy loader for UR. After switch from PI to UR, SYCL-RT linked with `ur_loader.dll` directly and still  experienced issues with race conditions in the teardown of SYCL-RT and  Unified Runtime. This change is indented to resolve this issue. intel/llvm#15262

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Enabled usage of Windows proxy loader for UR. After switch from PI to UR, SYCL-RT linked with `ur_loader.dll` directly and still experienced issues with race conditions in the teardown of SYCL-RT and  Unified Runtime. This change is indented to resolve this issue. intel/llvm#15262
```

extra space

- Fixed possible race at XPTI initialization in UR to resolve the issue with the `ur.call` XPTI stream being not be visible.  intel/llvm#15367
- Fixed the issue for the case when `ext_oneapi_barrier` fails and runtime incorrectly trying to release invalid event handle. intel/llvm#15367
- Resolved an overload resolution ambiguity on Windows self-builds when using the unary minus operator with bfloat16 by taking a const-qualified argument. intel/llvm#15393
- Fixed the behavior of `static|dynamic_address_cast` when target address space is `generic`. intel/llvm#15394
- Fixed behaviour of the queue barrier with waitlist for the in-order lists mode in the L0 adapter. intel/llvm#15404
- Fixed in-order queue dependencies for no-scheduler path when multiple queues are used. intel/llvm#15412
- Fixed queue barrier with waitlist when used with interoperability events. intel/llvm#15488
- Fixed edge cases for `exp(complex)` in device code. intel/llvm#15489 intel/llvm#15672 intel/llvm#15980 intel/llvm#15808 intel/llvm#15162
- Inlined trivial util functions for `half`/`half2` in IMF header to avoid multiple definition linker error. intel/llvm#15518

> - Fixed queue barrier with waitlist  for the case when there are multiple queues targetng different devices and in-order command lists are enabled on L0 adapter. intel/llvm#15516

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Fixed queue barrier with waitlist  for the case when there are multiple queues targeting different devices and in-order command lists are enabled on L0 adapter. intel/llvm#15516
```

# Release notes Nov'24

Release notes for commit range
[ebb3b4a21b3b0e977f44434781729df7de83e436](https://github.com/intel/llvm/commit/ebb3b4a21b3b0e977f44434781729df7de83e436)
...
[b0212c37b230d9dd3bb129df9f4ecc417b92ad86](https://github.com/intel/llvm/commit/b0212c37b230d9dd3bb129df9f4ecc417b92ad86)

> ## New Features

Author: @AlexeySachkov there were several commits for virtual functions:
- Implemented device image properties for virtual functions. intel/llvm#14875
- Fixed the issue in sycl-post-link which may cause multiple definition erros in the case when virtual functions are used and ITT instrumentation is present in the module. intel/llvm#14976
- Renamed virtual function properties based on updated extension specification proposed in intel/llvm#10540. intel/llvm#14994
- Updated `calls_indirectly` property to handle all passed template  arguments, but not the only first one. intel/llvm#15523
- Added new aspect `ext_oneapi_virtual_functions`. intel/llvm#15577
- Updated aspect propagation for virtual functions. intel/llvm#15703
- The logic in virtual function analysis is fixed to correctly handle deep call graphs and infer `calls-indirectly` for all relevant kernels. intel/llvm#15733

Can you please advice if those should be mentioned?
One one hand, it looks like initial support for virtual functions is implemented with those PRs, on other hand extension specification is not merged yet.

### SYCL Compiler

> - Added `-fsycl-allow-device-dependencies` command line option to enable support for dynamic linking. intel/llvm#14575

Author: Thanks. Fixed notes to be 80 column width.

- Added `-fsycl-dump-device-code` command line option to the new offloading model which allows to save generated SPIRV files in the specified directory. intel/llvm#14827
- Added support for `-fsycl-allow-device-dependencies` command line option on `clang-cl`. intel/llvm#14978
- Added support for invalid kernel argument detection via device sanitizer. intel/llvm#14512

> - Allowed device code to be exported by a Windows DLL. intel/llvm#14962

Reviewer 4: I don't think we can claim full support without https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/16228 so I'm leaning on the side of keeping them separate.

> - Allowed device code to be exported by a Windows DLL. intel/llvm#14962

Author: Thank you!

- Removed the need to mark free functions with `SYCL_EXTERNAL` attribute. intel/llvm#14170

> - Added support for old-style objects and static archives for the new offloading model. intel/llvm#15216

Reviewer 3: i dont know if we want to advertise this @asudarsa what do you think?

> - Added support for old-style objects and static archives for the new offloading model. intel/llvm#15216

Reviewer 5: This can be moved down the stack if possible

> - Added support for old-style objects and static archives for the new offloading model. intel/llvm#15216

Author: @asudarsa Can you clarify what that means in terms of release notes? Do you believe we should leave this note or not?

From your message I understand it like this: functionality is visible to the users and needs to be reported in the notes. Current implementation is temporary and in the future refactoring is needed to move functionality down the stack.

- Added support for `null` pointer detection via address sanitizer. intel/llvm#14891
- Added `-fsycl-allow-device-image-dependencies` command line option to replace `-fsycl-allow-device-dependencies` which is deprecated. intel/llvm#15407
- Added support for structs as free function kernel arguments. intel/llvm#15334
- Implemented a mechanism to lift SYCL device code restrictions in constant expressions. intel/llvm#15573
- New AMD targets `gfx941` and `gfx942` are added, and the subgroup size configuration for AMD RDNA GPUs is corrected due to ROCm driver limitations, supporting only `wave32` mode. intel/llvm#15414
- Added `--offload-arch` command line option which allows to enable SYCL offloading in the new driver model. intel/llvm#15624
- Implemented `asan_load`/`asan_store` for different address spaces. intel/llvm#15936
- Added support for dynamic linking on the new offloading model. intel/llvm#16055
- Added support for device globals in address sanitizer. intel/llvm#13678
- Added support for `-fsanitize-ignorelist=` to disable sanitizing on selected kernels. intel/llvm#15294

### SYCL Library

> - Added support for FPGA `task_sequence` and related properties: `fpga_cluster`, `pipelined`, `balanced`, `invocation_capacity`, `response_capacity`. intel/llvm#14750

Reviewer 6: oneAPI 2025.0 is the last DPC++ compiler that supports FPGA.  I assume these release notes are for a release after that?  If so, we should not mention FPGA features.

> - Added support for FPGA `task_sequence` and related properties: `fpga_cluster`, `pipelined`, `balanced`, `invocation_capacity`, `response_capacity`. intel/llvm#14750

Author: These release notes are for 2025.1. Removed, thanks.

- Added support for root group barrier on CUDA backend. intel/llvm#14828
- Introduced `map_external_linear_memory` for bindless images to enable mapping interop memory to linear USM, returning a `void *`. intel/llvm#14701
- Enabled aligned USM allocation APIs on Native CPU. intel/llvm#14010
- Enabled dynamic linking of AOT compiled images for OpenCL GPU. intel/llvm#14778
- Added implicit queue recording mechanism to SYCL Graph. intel/llvm#14453
- Introduced mask compressed ESIMD load/store API. intel/llvm#14941

> - Enabled symoblizer for UR santizer layer. intel/llvm#14911

Reviewer 7: Yeah, thank you for working on this. "Improved device sanitizer messages xxx" would be better :)

> - Enabled symoblizer for UR santizer layer. intel/llvm#14911

Author: Updated per suggestions, thanks.

- Added binary caching support to `kernel_compiler` extension. intel/llvm#15537
- A new graph enqueue function, `execute_graph`, has been implemented per updated [`sycl_ext_oneapi_graph`](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/66867d4faf87e03b855e3dc3d004f6b39c7553cd/sycl/doc/extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_graph.asciidoc) extension. intel/llvm#15677 
- Implemented dynamic command-groups feature for SYCL Graph. Currently supported on CUDA and HIP. intel/llvm#15700
- Added `(raw|decorated)_generic_ptr` aliases for `multi_ptr`. intel/llvm#15389
- Implemented events on Native CPU. intel/llvm#15926
- Added indeterminate constructor to work group memory interface instead of the default constructor to emphasize that any operation on such a work group memory object is undefined behavior except for assigning to it another work group memory object. intel/llvm#16003
- Added support for work group memory free function kernel parameter. intel/llvm#15861
- Implemented eviction mechanism for in-memory program cache. intel/llvm#16062

> - Now Level Zero adapter allows for multiple heterogenous drivers to coexist in a single Level Zero process.  intel/llvm#16034

Author: Since impact on end users is not obvious, removed from the notes.

> - Implemented kernel binary update functionality for the Level Zero adapter. intel/llvm#16154

Reviewer 8: This could probably be combined with the one on line 73:
```
 - Implemented dynamic command-groups feature for SYCL Graph. Currently supported on CUDA and HIP. intel/llvm#15700
```

Something like:
```
 - Implemented dynamic command-groups feature for SYCL Graph. intel/llvm#15700 intel/llvm#16154
```

- Added specification for [`sycl_ext_oneapi_reduction_properties`](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/e92bf5257dd6cf51bf6389af08922bf01c407bf4/sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_reduction_properties.asciidoc) extension. intel/llvm#15213
- Added specification for [`sycl_ext_oneapi_joint_for`](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/862cc9db1bea895c09fec12beccc7a02d8c37ea6/sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_joint_for.asciidoc) extension. intel/llvm#14886
- Added specification for [`get_kernel_info`](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/a03dc0d34dedb4f9d7067a6d2a09e909242b1f1c/sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_get_kernel_info.asciidoc) extension. intel/llvm#14472
- Added specification for [`sycl_ext_intel_event_mode`](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/19608d66c4ea536daa49f68a22096a4951b43bd2/sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_intel_event_mode.asciidoc) extension. intel/llvm#15704

## Improvements

### SYCL Compiler

- Improved ESIMD compilation time by moving spirv global translation out of the function processing. intel/llvm#14786

> - Improved the mechanism lowering of SYCL attributes to NVVM annotations. intel/llvm#14634

Reviewer 9: My inclination is also that this isn't a user-facing change but you're right that it removes some XFAILs. I think it's because The SYCLLowerIR pass now handles NVPTX/AMDGCN targets' kernel properties too, and includes code for handling the work-group size property.

Something like: "Fixed a bug for NVPTX/AMDGCN targets where kernel properties were not correctly propagated through the compiler (to the code generator)"?

> - Improved the mechanism lowering of SYCL attributes to NVVM annotations. intel/llvm#14634

Author: Thank you! Updated as proposed.

- Renamed `sycl-fusion` to `sycl-jit`. intel/llvm#14762
- Defined backend macros based on compiler which allows to compile an application for a backend without having to install the matching runtime. intel/llvm#15012

> - Always cleanup private shadow memory before using it to avoid shadow value pollutions. intel/llvm#15065

Reviewer 7: "Fix possible false positives due to not cleanup private shadow memory" would be more user friendly

> - Always cleanup private shadow memory before using it to avoid shadow value pollutions. intel/llvm#15065

Author: Updated per suggestions, thanks.

- Disabled attribute propagation specified by SYCL 1.2.1 and removed remaining SYCL 2017/1.2.1 compatibility elements, including `-Wsycl-strict` diagnostics related to SYCL 2017 compatibility.
- Disabled ` -Wreserved-identifer` and `-Wold-style-cast ` pedantic diagnostics coming from integration header/footer. intel/llvm#15171

> - Added pass to finish SROA for cooperative matrices. intel/llvm#15038

Reviewer 2: I would remove this item completely as it's not user visible. Is https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/16045 a part of this release? If yes - I would mention it instead, saying, that sycl::joint_matrix extension basic functionality is now built on top of SPV_KHR_cooperative_matrix extension. "Added pass to finish SROA for cooperative matrices" - it's just a part of the effort to make this switch.

> - Added pass to finish SROA for cooperative matrices. intel/llvm#15038

Author: Thanks, updated per suggestion.

> - Removed `-full-main-file-name` and `-fsycl-use-main-file-name` options because `-include-footer`option is sufficient. intel/llvm#15072

Reviewer 10: Yes this can be omitted.

> - Removed `-full-main-file-name` and `-fsycl-use-main-file-name` options because `-include-footer`option is sufficient. intel/llvm#15072

Author: Thanks, omitted.

- Added more supported aspects for CPU AOT target. intel/llvm#15263

> - Removed workaround for `readnone` function parameter attribute as it is properly handled by CPU runtime now. intel/llvm#15298

Reviewer 11: It's not user-visible. I don't think it should make it to Release Notes. Thanks for tagging!

> - Removed workaround for `readnone` function parameter attribute as it is properly handled by CPU runtime now. intel/llvm#15298

Author: Removed, thanks.

> - Added quiet option to offload extractor. intel/llvm#15386

Reviewer 12: In theory it can be used by end users, but I think the only people actually interested in using it are developers. I don't think we advertise it to end users at all, so I think it makes sense to omit this change.

This change was only added to make UR CI builds a bit less noisy.

- Added diagnostic for bad argument with `-fsycl-device-obj`. intel/llvm#15381
- Added a warning for attributes applied to non-kernel functions. intel/llvm#15154

> - Started obeying `-nocudalib` when linking against libdevice. intel/llvm#15378

Author: Thanks a lot! Updated as proposed.

- Fixed misleading diagnostic about non-external function/variable when applying attributes like  `[[sycl_device]]` or `[[intel::device_indirectly_callable]]` on  functions/variables without external linkage. intel/llvm#15372

> - Added `--only-needed` flag to llvm-link for AMDGCN. intel/llvm#15558

Author: Thanks a lot! Updated as proposed.

> - Native CPU now uses a pass to convert ABI-compliant calls to mux builtins, removing vector versions and ensuring the interface remains unaffected by the ABI. intel/llvm#15592

Author: Fixed to proposed statement.

- The `-fsycl-link=image` behavior is updated to package host objects similarly to `-fsycl-link=early`, ensuring proper linking, especially on Windows. intel/llvm#15539
- Enabled generation of approximate `div`/`sqrt` with `-ffast-math` for NVTPX. intel/llvm#15553

> - Added PoC implementation of [`sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_compiler`](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/51f8a05769cb2f4f4335edb572b2d806771e2874/sycl/doc/extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_compiler.asciidoc) extension with `libtooling` and `sycl-jit`. Added `-fsycl-rtc-mode` command line option which allows to lift some restrictions on free-function kernels when compiling SYCL code at runtime, omitting certain information for free-function kernels from the integration header. intel/llvm#15701 intel/llvm#15810 llvm#15892 intel/llvm#16109 intel/llvm#16138 intel/llvm#16139

Reviewer 13: @againull The source language `sycl_jit` and the libtooling-based implementation is not something we want to advertise for that release.

IIRC, the `kernel_compiler` extension with source language `sycl` was implemented for the first time in this release, still based on invoking clang. If that's correct (@cperkinsintel can confirm), this is what we should focus on in the release notes.

> - Address sanitizer started to ignore target extension type as we can't know exactly what size it is. intel/llvm#15484

Reviewer 7: Actually, the main goal of this PR is to skip instrument sycl joint matrix type.

> - Address sanitizer started to ignore target extension type as we can't know exactly what size it is. intel/llvm#15484

Author: @zhaomaosu Is it a workaround for some issue? Should that issue be mentioned in release note?

> - Address sanitizer started to ignore target extension type as we can't know exactly what size it is. intel/llvm#15484

Reviewer 7: Hi @againull, no, it's not a workaround. As we know, it's impossible for user to meet out of bounds issue when using joint matrix type. So we can safely ignore it. The change will not affect user experience.

> - Address sanitizer started to ignore target extension type as we can't know exactly what size it is. intel/llvm#15484

Author: Thanks. Removed this line as I don't see how user is impacted by this change.

- Added extra optimization passes in Native CPU pipeline. intel/llvm#14380
- The `-fsycl-host-compiler` option now uses only the available PATH settings to locate the specified compiler, ensuring it's found in known locations.  intel/llvm#15769

> - The integration header and footer are excluded from the preprocessed output to support `ccache`, with new options for inclusion. intel/llvm#15634

Reviewer 10: > As such, could be moved to bugfixes section
> 
> Tagging @mdtoguchi, @zahiraam

This is what I would propose:
"Added support for new option `include-internal-footer` that controls the printout of the integration footer in the pre-processed output. This helps the support of compilation with `ccache`.

- Now AST TypePrinter prints canonical types in free function shim functions correctly. intel/llvm#16119
- Enabled nonsemantic debug info by default (except fpga target). intel/llvm#16120

### SYCL Library

- Renamed interoperability related bindless images structs/funcs to `external` keyword over `interop`. intel/llvm#14444
- Removed UMF library dependency from `hwloc`.
- Enabled check for use of `SYCL_PI_TRACE` on all Linux to inform users that `SYCL_UR_TRACE` should be used instead. intel/llvm#15113
- Improved GDB printers for SYCL types/values. intel/llvm#15076
- Renamed `ur` to `ur.call` in XPTI traces. intel/llvm#14971
- Refactored XPTI framework to use 128-bit keys for collision elimination and added support for 64-bit universal IDs for backward compatibility. Previous 64-bit hash values were used to represent trace points and this has led to a few of hash  collisions. intel/llvm#14467
- Made calling `begin_recording` repeatedly an error. intel/llvm#15192
- Created one bitcode library for NVPTX. intel/llvm#15048
- Used GCC diagnostics pragma around getenv in XPTI library to disable warning on Windows. intel/llvm#15234

> - Improved library to prefer built-ins to retrieve kernel information over integration headers. intel/llvm#15070 intel/llvm#15922

Reviewer 4: We're still using integration headers since the built-ins themselves haven't been fully implemented yet. I would remove this item from the release notes.

> - Improved library to prefer built-ins to retrieve kernel information over integration headers. intel/llvm#15070 intel/llvm#15922

Author: Removed, thanks

- Aligned [`sycl_ext_oneapi_address_cast`](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/a4c53e4dcd949f9de4cb8d821c8fba63ddb24749/sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_address_cast.asciidoc) implementation with the specification. intel/llvm#15402

> - Started to use `static` address space cast for `atomic_ref` ctor in SPIR-V path. intel/llvm#15384

Reviewer 14: More like "Optimized `atomic_ref` constructor for SPIR-V targets".

However, improvements in https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/15543 and https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/16604 allow us to support non-SPIR-V targets with some trivial changes. I'll upload a PR for that later. That change wouldn't go to this next release though.

> - Fixed performance regression in the UR tracing layer. intel/llvm#15457

Reviewer 15: Good shout, this problem was introduced and fixed within the same release window.

- Refined the parsing of Device Sanitizer options provided via `UR_LAYER_ASAN_OPTIONS` environment variable. intel/llvm#15293
- Enabled compilation of libdevice for AMD (e.g. to support standard library math functions) which is represented by a single bitcode library file similar to NVPTX backend. intel/llvm#15055
- Enabled zesInit for L0 SysMan API usage in the L0 adapter which will make some SYCL device queries (e.g. `free_memory`) to work without setting `ZES_ENABLE_SYSMAN` environment variable. intel/llvm#15409
- Improved implementation to detect conflicts between kernel properties related to work group size. intel/llvm#15510
- Implemented improvements to allow framework/app software level layers to provide code locations for sycl generated XPTI events. intel/llvm#15190
- The SPIR-V built-in is now used for double rsqrt operations on ESIMD to improve performance. intel/llvm#15609
- Added property validation to core SYCL object ctors. intel/llvm#15253
- Deprecated `__SYCL_USE_VARIADIC_SPIRV_OCL_PRINTF__`. intel/llvm#15623
- Improved implementation to enforce data type restrictions in `marray`/`vec`. intel/llvm#15662

> - Improved handling of invalid/unsupported specialization constants in UR adapters. intel/llvm#13204

Author: I'm not sure if there is an impact, so removed.

- Allowed copy-construction of `device_global` if they do not have the `device_image_scope` property. intel/llvm#15075
- Improved UR libraries to avoid the overhead of preparing data for xpti, and the cost of the xpti call itself, if nothing is subscribed to the `ur.call` xpti call stream. intel/llvm#15940
- Refactored copy engine usage checks in the L0 adapter to improve performance. intel/llvm#15867
- Implemented tracing for in-memory kernel and program cache. intel/llvm#15925
- Fixed error handling in the command enqueue function in SYCL RT to avoid propagating exceptions with UR codes from MemoryManager calls as is and properly handle the error code to emit nice exception explaining what was wrong.  intel/llvm#15855
- Added address sanitizer AOT libraries for different GPU/CPU targets and renamed the device sanitizer library to libsycl-asan. intel/llvm#15939
- Undeprecated legacy `multi_ptr` as SYCL specification no longer deprecates it. intel/llvm#15893
- `info::device::atomic64` was deprecated, `sycl::aspect::atomic64` should be used instead. intel/llvm#15740

> - Use inheritance to implement oneapi properties. intel/llvm#16024

Reviewer 14: Maybe a bit of compile-time improvements, but we didn't make any measurements. Let's just drop this.

> - Stopped using `boost/mp11` for oneapi properties sorting and filterin. intel/llvm#16075 intel/llvm#16076

Reviewer 14: Maybe a bit of compile-time improvements, but we didn't make any measurements. Let's just drop this.

> - Enabled CFI sanitizer for UR libraries (`cfi-icall` is disabled). intel/llvm#16040

Reviewer 12: I think it flagged up some issues, but I don't think they've been resolved yet. Probably worth just dropping this.

- Updated [`KernelProgramCache.md`](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/e127a2e913d5a357095a12408cbff27cc2a64dfa/sycl/doc/design/KernelProgramCache.md) with details on in-memory eviction. intel/llvm#16129
- Enhanced [sycl_ext_oneapi_in_order_queue_events](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/65849fdc063eb1ca5a77cfed759f5a8c4856e413/sycl/doc/extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_in_order_queue_events.asciidoc) extension to allow `ext_oneapi_get_last_event` on queues with discarded events. intel/llvm#15638
- [`sycl_ext_oneapi_bindless_images`](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/f322f232c629600d85bec56f05d5979b2d61e438/sycl/doc/extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_bindless_images.asciidoc) extension was bumped to revision 6 to reflect the changes since revision 5. intel/llvm#14953

### SYCLcompat

- Enabled `device_info` caching within `device_ext`. intel/llvm#14630

> - Bumped `SYCLCOMPAT_COMPATIBILITY_TEMP` to 900. intel/llvm#15375

Author: @intel/syclcompat-lib-reviewers Could you please clarify what is the meaning of `SYCLCOMPAT_COMPATIBILITY_TEMP` and whether it should be mentioned in release notes. I am not sure if it is an internal detail or indicates the version of compat library.

- Fixed diagnostics about zero-length arrays coming from the integration header in pedantic compilation modes. intel/llvm#15175
- Added `ext_oneapi_ballot_group` aspect to spir64_x86_64 target. The aspect is supported since [OpenCL CPU  2024.2](https://github.com/intel/llvm/releases/download/2024-WW25/oclcpuexp-2024.18.6.0.02_rel.tar.gz). intel/llvm#15165
- Fixed string concatenation warning in integration headers. intel/llvm#15197
- Restored kernel instantiations on host which is necessary for debuggers to work with SYCL code. intel/llvm#15256
- Fixed compiler to preserve `llvm.compiler.used` until backend lowering for NVPTX and AMDGCN to prevent premature removal of protected symbols and to ensure proper handling of static device_globals for NVPTX/AMDGCN.. intel/llvm#15224
- Fixed local scope module variables for Native CPU. intel/llvm#15280
- Fixed device libraries requirement mask for SPIRV target to ensure that all required device libraries are linked to the program. intel/llvm#15336
- Fixed device library identification for NVPTX. intel/llvm#15357

> - Fixed SPIRV translator to filter out illegal attributes to align with Khronos behaviour. intel/llvm#15295

Reviewer 11: Indeed, it can be dropped.

- Fixed the crash with empty `-fsycl-targets` option. intel/llvm#15766
- Fixed calling convention to be `spir_func` for SPIRV function calls generated by passes hanlding specialization constants and hierarchical parallelism. intel/llvm#15718
- A workaround is added to address corner cases with SPIRV `AccessChain` usage in SYCL matrix operations, pending driver updates. intel/llvm#15738
- Addressed issue with code splitting and FPGA archives. intel/llvm#15794
- Fixed parsing of device values in backend target options. intel/llvm#15876
- Fixed device sanitizer to report only one error per each kernel instance to avoid false-alarms. intel/llvm#15326
- Disabled bundle compression when offloading to HIP. intel/llvm#15881
- Fixed the issue with incorrect symbolizer output for shared libraries in Device Sanitizer. intel/llvm#15797
- Disabled Address Sanitizer on modules with ESIMD to avoid the instrumented kernel code to become unacceptably large caused by lack of `noinline` support on ESIMD . intel/llvm#15972
- Added missing supported `gfx7` AMDGPU architectures to SYCL. intel/llvm#15723

> - Started to emit default template arguments in integration header to support the case when a free function kernel has a parameter that is templated and has a default template argument. intel/llvm#16005

Reviewer 16: Correct. You can add a single release note for both PRs saying that "a compilation issue with free function kernels when kernel arguments were templated types."
Even better from user's perspective, you can also simply say that "support for free function kernel struct kernel arguments has been added". These two are simply hotfixes for free function struct kernel arguments support.

- Fixed range::size() method to be exception-free. intel/llvm#15042
- Fixed `warning: multi-line comment` coming from SYCL headers. intel/llvm#15064
- Fixed SYCL RT to better differentiate device images compiled for a specific target using AOT. intel/llvm#14909
- Fixed interoperability API for making a SYCL device which have incorrectly propagated information to UR in some instances. intel/llvm#15023
- Fixed `bfloat16` to compile with clang < 9.0.0. intel/llvm#15102
- Fixed race condition in CUDA stream creation on CUDA backend. intel/llvm#15100
- Fixed missing declarations for broadcast and shuffle operations on Native CPU backend. intel/llvm#15140
- Fixed OpenCL C to spirv kernel_compiler for the multi-device case. intel/llvm#15099
- Fixed `device::ext_oneapi_can_access_peer()` query. intel/llvm#15152
- Fixed a regression in the host pointer update functionality after host device and queue removal. intel/llvm#15153
- Improved `ext::oneapi::experimental::info::device::architecture` reposonse for the cases when UR can't provide IP ver. intel/llvm#15169
- Fixed incorrect handling of non-native floating types in ESIMD `abs`/`min`/`max`. intel/llvm#15181

> - Fixed get_image_num_channels failing with mipmap images. intel/llvm#15036
> - Fixed windows exp(complex) edge case. intel/llvm#15162

Reviewer 17: ```suggestion
- Fixed `get_image_num_channels` failing with mipmap images. intel/llvm#15036
- Fixed Windows `exp(complex`) edge case. intel/llvm#15162
```

- Fixed race conditions in the group algorithms implemented in libclc for AMDGPU because the control barriers were not emitting any fences due to unspecified semantics. intel/llvm#12873
- Fixed device assertion bug on Windows where the assertion message is not printed when an assertion is triggered. intel/llvm#15232
- Made `event::get_backend()`, `size()` method of the image classes, `device_image::has_kernel()` to be exception-free as they are `noexcept` according to specification. intel/llvm#15173
- Fixed linker errors for `WorkGroup` collective functions on Native CPU backend. intel/llvm#15144
- Fixed a hang when invalid values are provided to `ONEAPI_DEVICE_SELECTOR`. intel/llvm#15255
- Addressed several issues in GDB xmethods: printing non-sycl types may generate a python exception, accessor subscripts using `size_t` report an unsupported subscript type, multi-dimensional accessors calculate the wrong array layout. intel/llvm#15250
- Fixed a flaky failure when getting write access to a buffer from multiple threads. intel/llvm#15273
- Fixed `nullptr` input handling for `make_kernel_bundle` interoperability API. intel/llvm#15247

> - Enabled usage of Windows proxy loader for UR. After switch from PI to UR, SYCL-RT linked with `ur_loader.dll`directly and still  experienced issues with race conditions in the teardown of SYCL-RT and  Unified Runtime. This change is intented to resolve this issue. intel/llvm#15262

Reviewer 17: ```suggestion
- Enabled usage of Windows proxy loader for UR. After switch from PI to UR, SYCL-RT linked with `ur_loader.dll` directly and still  experienced issues with race conditions in the teardown of SYCL-RT and  Unified Runtime. This change is indented to resolve this issue. intel/llvm#15262
```

- Added missing synchronization for host task after queue barrier. intel/llvm#15345
- Fixed handling of extensions that OpenCL FPGA driver doesn't report as supported, but which are actually supported (at least to the extent that UR and SYCL require). intel/llvm#15350
- Fixed possible race at XPTI initialization in UR to resolve the issue with the `ur.call` XPTI stream being not be visible.  intel/llvm#15367
- Fixed the issue for the case when `ext_oneapi_barrier` fails and runtime incorrectly trying to release invalid event handle. intel/llvm#15367
- Resolved an overload resolution ambiguity on Windows self-builds when using the unary minus operator with bfloat16 by taking a const-qualified argument. intel/llvm#15393
- Fixed the behavior of `static|dynamic_address_cast` when target address space is `generic`. intel/llvm#15394
- Fixed behaviour of the queue barrier with waitlist for the in-order lists mode in the L0 adapter. intel/llvm#15404
- Fixed in-order queue dependencies for no-scheduler path when multiple queues are used. intel/llvm#15412
- Fixed queue barrier with waitlist when used with interoperability events. intel/llvm#15488

> - Fixed edge cases for `exp(complex)` in device code. intel/llvm#15489  intel/llvm#15672 intel/llvm#15980 intel/llvm#15808

Reviewer 17: There is a line about `exp(complex)` fix on Windows, let's merge it here as a one more PR with those fixes

> - Inlined trivial util functions for `half`/`half2` in intel math header to avoid multiple definition linker error. intel/llvm#15518

Reviewer 17: ```suggestion
- Inlined trivial util functions for `half`/`half2` in IMF header to avoid multiple definition linker error. intel/llvm#15518
```

- Made internal function to be static in `imf` rounding utils to resolve multiple definition errors when developers use `fp32` and `fp64` intel math function in the same compiling unit. intel/llvm#15548
- Implemented missing work group collectives in Native CPU libdevice. intel/llvm#15618
- The `max_num_work_groups` query handling for exceeded launch limits has been improved for the HIP and OpenCL backends. intel/llvm#15369
- Fixed an issue where barrier operations in SYCL Graph did not correctly record dependencies from graph events on another in-order queue. intel/llvm#15601
- Fixed subgroup read/write implementation for Native CPU. intel/llvm#15627
- The ESIMD `mask_expand_load` now uses `passthrough` to handle unread elements, fixing sporadic failures. intel/llvm#15664
- Fixed the issue where  commands like `memcpy`, `copy`, and `fill` were not marked as enqueued because they bypass the  scheduler, causing subsequent barrier commands to be omitted. intel/llvm#15697
- Fixed `bfloat16` component type matrix `muladd`. intel/llvm#15514

> - Fixed SYCL Graph API to be ABI-neutral to avoid dual-abi issues on Linux. intel/llvm#15694

Reviewer 17: Should be moved into API/ABI breaking changes section as an upcoming breaking change

> - Fixed `sycl::kernel_bundle`functionality for multi-device scenario for Level Zero and OpenCL backends. intel/llvm#15546

Reviewer 17: ```suggestion
- Fixed `sycl::kernel_bundle` functionality for multi-device scenario for Level Zero and OpenCL backends. intel/llvm#15546
```

> - The info query for P2P has been corrected to return the appropriate data type, with corresponding updates to the `DPC++` runtime. intel/llvm#15873

Reviewer 17: This seems to be purely internal non-functional change, I would drop it

> - The urPlatformGet function in the OpenCL adapter now handles INVALID_VALUE by not attempting to populate an empty platform list, aligning with the updated UR specification. intel/llvm#15779

Reviewer 17: ```suggestion
- Fixed the `UR_RESULT_ERROR_INVALID_VALUE` error being thrown when negative `ONEAPI_DEVICE_SELECTOR="!level_zero:*"` is applied in an environment with no platforms other than Level Zero available. intel/llvm#15779
```

I happened to be the reporter for that bug

- Added OpenCL version check for independent forward progress query. intel/llvm#15872
- Fixed the bug where queue creation would fail on a system with multiple AMD GPU devices. intel/llvm#15964
- Aligned checks performed in `is_compatible` implementation with the checks in the standard image selection path. intel/llvm#16060
- Fixed multi-device support for persistent cache. intel/llvm#16056
- The barrier dependency for out-of-order profiling tags has been fixed to ensure future work is correctly sequenced relative to the start/end of the profiling tag.  intel/llvm#16112

> - Now `online_compiler::compile` is supported when compiled with pre-C++11 ABI. intel/llvm#16179

Reviewer 17: ```suggestion
- Enhanced `online_compiler::compile` to support pre-C++11 ABI. intel/llvm#16179
```

Perhaps could be moved to Improvements

## Known Issues

- On Windows, the Unified Runtime's Level Zero leak check does not work correctly with
  the default contexts on Windows. This is because on Windows the release
  of the plugin DLLs races against the release of static global variables
  (like the default context).
- Intel Graphic Compiler's Vector Compute backend does not support O0 code and
  often gets miscompiled, produces wrong answers and crashes. This issue directly
  affects ESIMD code at O0. As a temporary workaround, we have optimize ESIMD code
  even in O0 mode.
  [00749b1e8](https://github.com/intel/llvm/commit/00749b1e8e3085acfdc63108f073a255842533e2)
- When using `sycl_ext_oneapi_matrix` extension it is important for some
  devices to use the sm version (Compute Capability) corresponding to the device
  that will run the program, i.e. use `-fsycl-targets=nvidia_gpu_sm_xx` during
  compilation. This particularly affects matrix operations using `half` data
  type. For more information on this issue consult with
  https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/index.html#wmma-restrictions

> - [new] C/C++ math built-ins (like `exp` or `tanh`) can return incorrect

Author: @AlexeySachkov Can you please help to understand if these PRs intel/llvm#15489 intel/llvm#15672 intel/llvm#15980 intel/llvm#15808 fixed this issue? If I get it right from one of the PR descriptions, `tanh` problem is caused by problem in msvc headers. And considering that several fixes are landed for `exp`, I am not sure if this issue is still relevant.

Reviewer 18: It's an MSVC issue actually, but we still use the old version, therefore this test case is skipped, see: https://github.com/intel/llvm/issues/16950
So from SYCL POV we addressed all issues with exp.
